Over the past few years,
we have all looked forward
to what has affectionately been called
The Inside Story.
This time it will be conducted
by another one of the Gilead instructors,
Brother Richard Chilton.
Take it away, Brother Chilton!
Welcome to this edition of The Inside Story.
At Joshua 24:15,
the tribes of Israel were instructed
to “choose for [themselves] . . .
whom [they would] serve.”
Well, our four guests today
have had to make some choices of their own
—choices that no doubt contributed
to their qualifying to attend
the 149th class of Gilead.
Let’s learn more about the choices they made
and who helped them to do so
as we meet our first guest,
Brother Sung-hee Lee from South Korea.
Welcome, Sung-hee.
Thank you.
Please have a seat.
Well, Sung-hee, you come
from a family of worshippers
who have been faithfully serving Jehovah
for three generations.
Tell us about them.
Yes.
It began with my grandmother.
She was the first to become a Witness
back in 1970.
I’m so grateful to Jehovah
that all in my family
—my parents, my sister and her husband,
and my brothers and their wives—
are all faithfully serving Jehovah
to this day.
Well, that’s certainly a wonderful heritage
to be a part of.
Now, your current assignment
is at the branch office in Korea.
How long have you been serving there?
Well, if you count the first one
and a half years I served at Bethel,
that would be nine and a half years.
I say that because I was reassigned.
I actually left Bethel to go to prison.
Well, now, that’s not something
we typically hear
as a reason for leaving Bethel, is it?
What happened?
You see, in South Korea,
all males become eligible
for military conscription when they turn 19,
and a draft notice comes sometime after that.
As for us, Jehovah’s Witnesses,
because we refuse military service,
the result would be
a year and a half sentence in prison.
But you may not go right away.
Now, that’s interesting.
What would be the factors
that would determine
when your prison sentence
would actually begin?
From the time you receive a draft notice
until you actually go to prison,
especially in recent times,
that time period was unknown
and different for each brother.
A lot depended on the judge you got.
As for me, I had to wait five years
from the time I first appeared in the court
until I finally went to prison.
Well, was that frustrating
for you to, in effect,
have your life be placed on hold
for five years?
Honestly, yes.
But understanding that I could go to prison
at any moment,
I had to make a choice
—a choice as to how I was going
to spend my time.
Do I use that time
just staying at home doing nothing
and planning nothing,
since I could go into prison at any moment?
Or do I use that time to earn some money
for the time when I’m finally released
from prison?
Or
do I use my life to the full,
pursuing spiritual things first
while I could do so freely?
Well, that’s quite the situation to be in.
What was your thought process through that?
What did you decide to do
given those circumstances?
So the first thing I did was pray.
I prayed and prayed.
And while doing research,
I came across an article
in a December 1, 2004,
issue of The Watchtower,
which was entitled
“Trusting in Jehovah’s Loving Care.”
In that article, there was a quote that said:
“We should plan ahead as if Armageddon
“would not come in our lifetime
but [live] our life
as if it would come tomorrow.”
Well, that was the answer I needed.
So I decided to plan ahead
as if my prison term wasn’t coming tomorrow.
OK.
So given those options
that you mentioned to us a minute ago,
what did you decide to do?
So I decided to pioneer.
I also volunteered
at the international convention.
Here I’m welcoming the delegates
as they arrive to their hotel.
I also even got accepted to Bethel.
Here I’m working in my assignment.
And here are the brothers and sisters
working in the Computer Department,
where I work.
How nice!
Well, let me ask you, how do you feel,
Sung-hee, that you benefited
by choosing to pursue spiritual pursuits
while you were waiting for those five years?
Pioneering and Bethel service
really helped me to prepare my heart
for the time
when the call finally came to go to prison.
And it was during this period
that I really grew spiritually.
Well, I guess pioneering and Bethel
can have that positive effect
on a person, can’t it?
But the day did finally arrive
—didn’t it?—
when you had to leave
and begin your prison sentence.
We can only imagine what
a sobering moment that was for you.
Do you mind telling us about it?
Yes.
When the day came,
many in the Bethel family came outside
to wave me off and to cheer me on.
It was a moment that I’ll never forget.
One brother, he even said
he would always remember me in his heart,
and I really cherish what he said to me.
Well, that was very encouraging, no doubt.
Do you mind talking about how life was
for you in prison?
There were definitely moments
when I felt anxious.
But my three fleshly brothers
and many other Korean brothers
also served their time in prison.
And their choices and experiences
helped me decide how I was going to spend
my time in prison.
So I decided to make a list right away
of what to do while in prison.
I made some spiritual goals
such as reading the Proclaimers  book
and reading other publications.
And a group of about seven to eight brothers
in the same prison cell,
we discussed the daily text together
every day in the evening.
We called it evening worship,
similar to morning worship in Bethel.
Well, that was certainly
a wise use of the time that you had there.
What can you tell us
about the current situation in South Korea
for our brothers
in connection with military service?
Just a few months ago,
the authorities adopted alternative service
for proven conscientious objectors.
Under this arrangement,
you are not labeled as a convicted criminal.
And you don’t live in a prison cell
but live in a more communal
living arrangement.
But there is one thing
about this alternative service:
Instead of your prison sentence
being a year and a half,
you have to do alternative service
for three years.
Wow!
OK, double the time.
You know, our hearts really go out
to our brothers and our sisters
who have served time in prison
“for righteousness’ sake.”
But you were able to complete
your prison sentence.
What was next for you
once you were a free man?
Without hesitation, I immediately filled out
another application to return to Bethel,
and I was accepted to return to Bethel.
Well, good for you.
We’re glad that worked out.
If we could just circle back
for just one moment.
You had mentioned
that there was one thing in particular
that was especially helpful to you
that helped you endure
that difficult time in prison.
Do you mind telling us about it?
Of course.
Many brothers and sisters around the world
wrote to us brothers in prison.
And I personally received a number of them.
In fact, I brought some of them here,
right here, with me.
That someone
who never met me, who never knew me,
wrote such encouraging,
comforting letters, . . .
Yes.
. . . it really warmed my heart
and really comforted me.
It made me feel that I’m never alone
wherever I am in the world
and that I was part of a very special,
close, loving, international brotherhood.
So I read them over and over again,
and I saved all of these letters.
Oh, that is so encouraging, Sung-hee.
But I have to ask you, why did you bring
these letters with you to New York?
Actually, some of these letters came
from Bethelites right here
at world headquarters.
I wanted to meet them in person
and tell them how much I appreciated
all those letters and prayers
and how they really helped me
to get through my time in prison.
We could certainly understand
if those would have been
some tearful reunions for you.
Well, in conclusion, Sung-hee,
I just have one last question for you.
You had mentioned earlier
that when you were deciding
what you were going to do with the time
you had before going to prison,
you said that the first thing that you did
was pray.
Why was prayer so important to you?
Through these experiences,
I’m absolutely confident
that Jehovah both hears and answers
our prayers
when we are faced with choices.
And also I am confident
that by means of the prayers
that were offered in my behalf,
Jehovah helped me to stick
to the choices that I had made
to stay loyal to him.
So please keep praying
for our brothers in prison
wherever they are in the world.
And please keep writing them letters.
Well, I can assure you, Sung-hee,
we’ll continue to do just that.
Thank you so much for sharing
your encouraging experience with us.
It really touched our hearts.
Well, next on our program,
we’re going to go all the way to West Africa,
where our next guests will be coming from,
the country of Senegal.
We’ll meet Alain and Achaïe Tendeng.
Well, Alain and Achaïe, welcome.
Nice to have you with us on The Inside Story.
Thank you.
It’s a pleasure to have you.
Now, I understand
that your current assignment
has you serving at the branch office
in Senegal, West Africa.
Now, Alain, Senegal is your home,
born and raised.
But, Achaïe, I understand that you come
from the neighboring country of Mali.
In fact, I was told that your mother
comes from a very interesting part
of the country of Mali.
Can you tell us about it?
Yes.
My mother is from Timbuktu.
In fact, when I was young,
she took me there to visit her family.
Now, Achaïe, you are probably
the first person that we have ever met
that has actually been to Timbuktu.
What is it like?
Well,
as you can see on the screen,
that is what the region of Timbuktu
looks like.
It is in the Sahara Desert,
which stretches on
for thousands of kilometers.
Well, it’s obviously a very vast territory.
But what can you tell us
about the people of the Timbuktu region?
The people there live a nomadic lifestyle
and are nearly all Muslims.
Actually, both my two parents
are from a Muslim background.
Now, that’s quite interesting.
Given that background,
what were some of the challenges
that you had to face
in becoming one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
Although I got baptized at 15 years of age,
I didn’t always make the best choices
in my teen years,
and I had to suffer the consequences
of those choices.
However, in my early 20’s,
I decided to build a strong
and personal relationship with Jehovah.
To be able to do so, I received help
from spiritually mature brothers and sisters,
such as pioneers, elders,
missionaries.
For example, this is my spiritual mother
on the left side of the screen
and, on the right side of the screen,
her missionary companion,
who is still serving in Mali faithfully
for 45 years now.
All of these mature persons helped me
to see the value of personal study
and “thinking ability.”
Once I got this good habit
of reasoning on Bible principles,
I could make good choices
that pleased Jehovah,
such as leaving my well-paying job
and starting pioneering.
It was not easy, however,
because there was still this family pressure
for me to get a good job
and earn a good living.
But I’m still striving to try to make
good decisions
that please Jehovah.
Well, that’s encouraging.
In spite of the pressures
that you had to face,
you obviously continued making
good decisions,
because you were eventually appointed
to serve
as a special pioneer—weren’t you?—
in the southern part of Mali
in a region called Sikasso.
Tell us about that, please.
Yes, I was so happy there.
The preaching work was wonderful.
I really enjoyed it.
And this is the Kingdom Hall where I served.
And one day, we received a visit
from a circuit overseer
—a single circuit overseer.
OK.
Now, I could see when you made that comment,
you looked over at Alain.
So we can only assume that, Alain,
you were this young, handsome,
single circuit overseer
who visited Achaïe’s congregation in Sikasso.
Is that right?
Well, I visited the congregation.
But we had already met previously
at a circuit assembly.
So we knew each other.
But at the time,
there was nothing special going on.
OK.
Well, thank you for the clarification.
We appreciate that.
But since we’re now talking to you, Alain,
maybe we can hear
a little bit about your story.
Did you always want to be a circuit overseer?
Well, no.
In fact, when I was a boy,
I wanted to become a Catholic priest.
Oh, really?
Yes.
Being raised in a Catholic family,
at 13, I went to get training
by one of the Catholic religious orders.
But after just the one year of training,
I chose to leave.
Although I left,
I still had a love for the Bible.
One day, I went to one of my friends
to see if he would like
to play soccer with me.
But he was about to have a Bible study
with one of Jehovah’s Witnesses
who was a missionary.
So I decided
to stay and listen.
Over time, I came to really love
what I was studying in the Bible.
And eventually
I got baptized at the age of 17,
as shown here.
Wow!
Now, that’s quite interesting.
You had mentioned to me before
that your parents
are not Jehovah’s Witnesses.
How did they respond
to your becoming baptized as one?
Well, it was not easy for them to accept.
They had an expectation of me
helping support the family financially.
At the same time, I really wanted to pioneer.
So it took several years and much struggling,
but eventually I was able
to enter into the pioneer service.
Was there anyone in your life at that time
who helped you to stay spiritually focused
as you were trying to achieve
these spiritual goals?
Oh, yes.
Like Achaïe, while working
toward entering into the pioneer service,
I too chose to associate
with spiritually strong ones
in the congregation.
Missionaries, like this couple,
helped me to see the importance
of putting and keeping
spiritual things first in life.
And this helped me to remain focused.
Eventually, I was able to serve
in unassigned territory.
Going throughout the territory
with my motorbike
was a really good time
that I enjoyed there.
Oh, you know,
I’ve always wanted one of those.
Yes.
And later I was invited to attend
the School for Single Brothers.
And after that,
I was trained in the circuit work.
And this couple shown here
is the missionary couple
who first started my Bible study.
He’s the one who provided
the training for the circuit work.
Oh, we can only imagine that they
must have been so proud of you,
to see the spiritual progress
that you had made.
But now let’s fast forward
just a little bit in the story.
At this point, now,
you’re serving as a circuit overseer.
Achaïe is serving as a special pioneer
in Sikasso.
And, Achaïe, you’ve been sitting there
so patiently waiting.
Thank you, by the way.
Would you like to continue the story?
Yes.
When we got to know each other better,
we decided to get married.
In fact, we were married
in Senegal on a Tuesday,
and later that same week, we had to be
in Guinea-Bissau for the circuit assembly.
OK, if we could just pause
for just a moment here.
So if we’re understanding this,
Alain, please, please tell us
that there were no circuit overseers
or substitute circuit overseers
available in all of West Africa
who could cover
that circuit assembly for you.
You were married four days and had to be
in another country for an assembly?
There was no one
who could take care
of that assembly for you?
Really?
Brother Chilton, that was fine.
As you already know, the blessings of Jehovah
are far beyond any sacrifices
we can make in his service.
We really loved that work.
We loved being with our brothers and sisters.
Oh, yes, we really loved to preach with them.
You can see in this picture—
Preaching with them
—it’s really so special to us.
Seeing them in this picture
even brings very nice memories.
Yeah.
We enjoyed also being with them
in their homes,
seeing their strong faith,
and seeing their love for Jehovah
despite the challenges they were facing.
We really came to love them very much.
Well, just taking a look at your happy smiles
in that picture there,
we can see that you not only loved the work
but that you loved the people
that you were serving.
But as we know, changes come, don’t they?
And you received the change of assignment
from the circuit work
into Bethel in Senegal.
In fact, I understand this picture
was taken just two months
before you came to New York
to begin your Gilead training.
It’s with Brother Splane providing
a shepherding visit to your Bethel family
—beautiful family, by the way.
Now, from our previous discussions,
it became very clear to me
how much you both love and appreciate
the young people
who are in our organization.
From your personal observations,
what would you say were the things
that you saw as key elements
to their achieving spiritual success,
from your own observations?
What I have observed
is that young ones
who make the truth their own
and who keep their spiritual routines
to be able to continue building
a spiritual, personal relationship
with Jehovah
and who continue to associate
with spiritually mature brothers
who can help them keep their focus
are those who are more successful
in their Christian course of life.
I really pray to Jehovah
that all our young ones
may have this same experience
—that they may “taste and see
that Jehovah is good,”
as mentioned at Psalm 34:8.
If they do, they can see that Jehovah is able
to open doors for them where they think
that there is no door to be opened.
And that will lead them
to a long and satisfying life
without any regrets.
Oh, those are some beautiful comments.
Thank you very much for that, Achaïe.
What about you, Alain?
Well, looking back,
I can see that Jehovah
has really been kind and good to us.
He has provided brothers and sisters,
mature ones,
who helped us to have the courage
to put him first in our lives.
Their choices encouraged us
to make good choices.
And Jehovah has blessed us in ways
we could never foresee.
And we are confident that he will do
the same with all our brothers and sisters,
including young ones
who courageously put Jehovah first
in their lives.
Well, we thank you both so much
for your encouraging comments.
And our prayer will be that Jehovah
continues to bless you both
as you both keep making
wise decisions in his service.
Thank you so much for joining us today.
Thank you.
Well, last but certainly not least,
we go all the way to the country of Ukraine
to meet our next, final guest on our program.
Let’s give our attention
as we meet Brother Anzhel Tkachuk.
Welcome, Anzhel.
Thank you.
It’s a pleasure to have you with us
on The Inside Story  today.
Now, Anzhel, it’s often been said
that a person’s story
takes us on a journey of a lifetime.
Your story, however, my friend,
takes us on a journey of several lifetimes.
Isn’t that true?
Yes.
You know, my great-great-grandfather
and great-great-grandmother
were the first Jehovah’s Witnesses
in my family.
And here you can see them
in the 1940’s in Ukraine.
Well, that is definitely
a wonderful heritage to be a part of.
Would you say, Anzhel, that the choices
that members of your family made
over the years
had a direct bearing on your being here
attending the 149th class of Gilead?
Definitely yes.
You know, they were serving Jehovah
for many, many years.
They had a very hard but interesting life,
a life full of many different stories.
For example, when my great-grandfather
was exiled to Siberia
because of being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
my great-grandmother
would send him magazines
hidden in bottles of pork fat.
You said pork fat.
OK, now, that sounds pretty interesting.
Can you tell us more
about this “secret pork fat recipe”
of your great-grandmother?
OK, so my mom took some photos
and sent them to me
to explain how it was done.
So as you can see here,
first this fat was melted
so that you could have liquid fat;
then we needed to wait so that this fat
would become hard and thick.
Then a magazine was wrapped in linen
and a hole was made into the fat.
And then this wrapped magazine
was put in the hole,
and more fat was put on top
to hide this magazine, and now it’s done.
Now you have both physical
and spiritual food in one bottle.
Well, there it is, everything you need
to survive in Siberia, right?
Well, let me ask you,
did the guards in Siberia
ever find those magazines
hidden in pork fat?
Sadly, yes.
And that’s why they added
an additional five and a half years
to my great-grandfather’s exile time
in Siberia.
But soon, his son, my grandfather
was exiled to Siberia too.
And here you can see
my great-grandfather on the left
and my grandfather on the right.
Well, now you shared with us
some details about your great-grandfather.
What can you tell us about your grandfather,
depicted on the right?
You know, he was so zealous for Jehovah.
While in Siberia, he was helping
in supplying Bible literature
for local brothers and sisters
though it was not always safe to do it.
Well, clearly they were both courageous men.
When were your family members
allowed to leave Siberia
and return to Ukraine?
It was in 1967/1968.
And it was then when my grandfather started
to reproduce Bible magazines and books,
and the whole family helped.
That’s amazing!
Were there any particular methods
that they used to accomplish this?
They used several different methods.
For example, they used
a special photo machine like you see here
to make photos of the magazines.
This and machines similar to these machines
were used to make,
so to say, “handmade” literature.
Well, just looking at those photos,
we could see
that the men in your family
were both courageous and zealous.
Yes, they were.
But so were the women in our family.
Here in this photo, you can see
my great-grandmother with her daughter,
and it was she who sent
these magazines hidden
in the bottles of pork fat.
And here you can see
my grandmother on my mother’s side.
She was a Witness too.
And here you can see her with her children.
And this little girl with a guitar is my mom.
And, you know, once the government
wanted to separate them.
They wanted to have a public hearing
to take all her children away.
Why they wanted to do it was
because it was when in the Soviet Union
all children were forced to support
political ideas of the government.
But my grandmother’s children
chose not to do it.
Now, that’s interesting;
the children made this choice.
But what about your grandmother
when she was forced to make this choice
between what the Communist Party
was dictating
and what Jehovah said, what did she do?
She wanted to prove and to show
that she was a good mother
and that she was a good mother
because she was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
because she believed in God.
And, you know, even during this hearing,
one woman stood up and screamed,
“Don’t listen to her, as you will become
one of Jehovah’s Witnesses too!”
But people said, “No, we want to hear more.”
So she kept going.
And when she finished,
all the people voted in her favor
that she could keep
all her children with her.
And here you can see
my grandmother years later
with her family—children and grandchildren.
Wow!
That is an absolutely incredible story!
Obviously, Jehovah blessed her
for her loyal efforts there.
But, now, Anzhel,
as you reflect upon the decisions
that members of your family have made,
how have their decisions affected you?
You know, they helped me
to love Jehovah with all my heart
and to put him always first in my life.
Can you provide us an example of that?
Yes, for example, in Ukraine
all young men are required
to do military service.
But I, like many other brothers,
chose not to do it.
I chose civilian,
or alternative, service instead.
So I was still living at home.
And the government gives you
any work that they want,
and you need to do it for two years.
If you don’t mind my asking,
what job did they give you?
So, OK, they sent me to clean sewers
and water systems.
So I needed to go inside these tanks,
which were so filthy,
and I needed to clean them out.
And for me, it was really very hard work.
And sometimes I felt very sad
about my situation.
Yeah.
We’re so sorry, Anzhel,
that you had to go through that.
But we certainly appreciate your loyalty
to Jehovah at the same time.
What helped you to get through
that difficult period in your life?
For me, it was my family.
I would think about my grandfather,
grandmother,
great-grandfather and great-grandmother.
And I thought: ‘They showed me how to do it.
‘They showed me how to go through it.
They showed me that with Jehovah’s help,
I can do it.’
Well, you have learned
some very powerful lessons from your family.
And now here you are at Gilead.
You’ve completed your Gilead training.
And we can only imagine how proud
and happy your family must be for you.
Can you tell us, though, what has been
the highlight for you
from your Gilead training?
Yes, Gilead has helped me to see more,
to understand more, and to feel more
—to see more this wonderful history
of Jehovah’s people
(this wonderful heritage that we all have),
to understand more
these wonderful, deep Bible gems
(Bible lessons for my life),
and to feel more of Jehovah’s love
and the love of the brothers and sisters,
especially here.
You know, my family, they had
just a few magazines,
a few books, and a songbook,
but it was enough for them
to build strong faith in Jehovah.
So in the new world,
I want to see all of my big, big family.
And I want to share with them
these wonderful gems
I learned here in Gilead
while they were sleeping.
And I want to say to them, “Thank you
for setting such a good example
of faith for me.”
Anzhel, you have certainly touched our hearts
by means of that beautiful story.
Thank you for sharing
your family legacy with all of us.
We really appreciated that.
Thank you.
Well, as we mentioned
in our opening comments,
when the tribes of Israel were instructed
to choose for themselves
whom they would serve,
their response is recorded at Joshua 24:18,
where they said:
“We too will serve Jehovah,
because he is our God”
—a wise choice, indeed!
As we’ve learned from the experiences
shared by our four guests today,
the choices that we make do matter.
They matter to us,
to our family members,
to our worldwide brotherhood,
and especially to our loving God, Jehovah.
We hope that you have been
both encouraged and motivated
by the experiences you’ve heard today.
Until we meet again on our future edition
of The Inside Story,
please enjoy this brief, little snapshot
of Class 149.
We were not disappointed.
Thank you, Brother Chilton,
along with the students who assisted you.